The Hot Hand Theory
In this project, we study a paper written in 1985 by three psychological researchers, Thomas
Gilovich, Robert Vallone, and Amos Tversky, that examines shooting data from different contexts in
basketball to see if there is statistically significant evidence for a theory in basketball known as the “hot
hand theory.” Polling data from the paper confirm that there’s a widespread perception among fans,
players, and coaches that players are more likely to score after making a shot or several shots. This
phenomenon is known as “streak shooting” or “having the hot hand,” and despite the belief in its
existence, the paper concludes that statistical evidence of its occurrence is questionable. This paper pokes
serious holes in the belief in streak shooting by examining field goal and free throw data from the NBA
and a controlled experiment that contrasted the predictions of Cornell varsity basketball players (which
frequently aligned with the hot hand theory) with their actual shooting performance.
The first study examined field goal percentages across 48 Philadelphia 76ers home games. The
data was organized into the percentages of scoring conditioned on the players’ previous shots. For
example, one column in the table had the percentage of shots made following two misses. Treating the
differences between the percentages of scoring following X hits and following X misses for each player
as observations, it was found that these differences are in fact statistically significant but in such a
direction counter to the hot hand theory. For example, if you take the differences of columns 6 and 4 of
Table 1 and report this as a new column of Table 1, you get the following set of differences: -0.07, 0.02, 0,
-0.05, -0.02, -0.08, -0.05, -0.01, -0.14. Assuming that these differences come from a normal distribution,
if the hot hand theory is true, you’d expect the mean of this normal distribution to be positive. However,
the sample mean of these differences is approximately -0.044, and the sample standard deviation is
approximately 0.0488. Calculating a t statistic of the form t = (x_bar - mu_0)/(s/sqrt(n)), where in this
case x_bar = -0.044, s = 0.0488, mu_0 = 0, and n = 9, you get t to be about -2.73, which is close to the
-2.79 paired t statistic stated in the paper (probably different only due to rounding error), which was
significant at the 5% level.
The authors then performed a Wald-Wolfowitz runs test on the data. A run is a series of either
consecutive hits or misses. A certain number of runs would be expected due to chance if successive shots
are independent, and a Wald-Wolfowitz runs test is a nonparametric asymptotically normal test that can be
used to see if the observed number of runs has a statistically significant departure from what is expected
due to chance. Given a certain number of hits and misses, and assuming shots are independent, the mean
and variance of the number of runs can be calculated, and the number of runs has an asymptotic normal
distribution with this mean and variance. Thus, an asymptotic normal test can be done to see if the
observed number of runs is statistically significantly lower than would be expected for each player due to
chance, as would be implied by the streak shooting hypothesis. GVT found that for 8 out of the 9
observed players, there was no statistically significant difference, and for the outlier, there was statistical
significance in the opposite direction to that implied by the hot hand theory.
Another approach the authors took toward examining the hot hand theory was a test of
stationarity by examining groups of four consecutive shots. They categorized these groups as high (3-4
hits), moderate (2 hits), or low performance (0-1 hits). They noted that, given, for example, a player’s hit
rate of 0.5 and assuming the independence of successive shots, the expected proportions of high,
moderate, and low performance groups would be 5/16, 6/16, and 5/16, respectively. If the hot-hand theory
is true, one would expect statistically significantly higher proportions of high and low performance groups
than would be predicted assuming independence of successive shots. One way to investigate this is to do a
𝜒
2 goodness of fit test to see if a multinomial distribution with parameters 5/16, 6/16, 5/16 is a good model
for the joint distribution of the number of groups of each of the 3 categories. If you cannot reject this null
hypothesis, then this would cast doubt on the hot-hand theory. Performing this test on each player 3 times,
each time starting groups of 4 shots at different positions of a player’s shot record modulo 4, the authors
found that in no case was there a 𝜒
2 statistic large enough to reject the null hypothesis. This provided
additional evidence against the hot-hand theory.
Despite the evidence contradictory to the hot hand theory, the authors acknowledge that the data
examined up to this point is “contaminated” by various factors that arise in live game situations such as
shot selection, player confidence, and the level of defensive pressure from the opposing teams. The
authors subsequently examine data from shots taken in an environment controlled for no defense by
examining free throw data from the Boston Celtics. As in the previous study on field goal data, if the hot
hand theory were true, we would expect a player to have higher scoring percentages on the second free
throw following a hit on the first than a miss. However, the authors didn’t find a statistically significant
difference compared to the null hypothesis of independence between free throws. Another study to
account for the variability of live game scenarios was conducted in a controlled shooting environment
with Cornell University basketball players. Conducting the same tests as for the NBA field goal data, the
authors found no statistically significant evidence to support the hot hand theory with the exception of one
player.
A new metric examined by the researchers was predictability, a direct comparison between the
Cornell players’ beliefs about whether they would make the subsequent shot and the actual result of the
shot. They obtained data from the shooter and asked an observer to bet on the outcome of the upcoming
shot. The betting strategy from both the players and the observers reflected a belief in the hot hand theory
with both wagering higher probabilities of a hit following a previous hit. The average correlation between
the prediction data and the results was 0.02 with only 5 out of 26 players achieving a statistically
significant positive correlation, seeming to the researchers to reflect that players didn’t predict their shots
well because of an erroneous belief in the hot hand theory.
All in all, the authors of the paper collected data on basketball players in a variety of contexts,
and, using a variety of statistical tests, claimed that there’s no statistically significant evidence to support
the hot hand theory. They hypothesized that the widespread belief in the hot hand could be attributed to
streaks of shots being particularly memorable or to bias in people’s perception of chance, where they can
have a tendency to believe in a “law of small numbers” where they expect a series of fair coin flips to
have equal numbers of heads and tails even in the window of a small number of flips.
However, more recent research has challenged this. One article (Miller and Sanjurjo) details a
small but significant selection bias in the original paper. The authors of the original paper operate under
the erroneous assumption that, if you have a sequence of independent fair coin flips with streaks of, say 3
heads, examine where the streaks of heads are, and put the flips immediately following these streaks into
a bucket, the probability that you will draw heads from the bucket is counterintuitively less than 50%. As
the article argues, suppose you do 100 coin flips, and that flips 39, 40, and 41 happen to be H. Suppose
you happen to draw flip 42 from the bucket at random. If 42 is H, then the only restriction imposed by this
information is that flip 43 has to be in the bucket, since 40, 41, and 42 are 3 heads. However, if 42 is T,
then the restrictions are imposed that 43, 44, and 45 are not in the bucket. Because there are more
possibilities for what could have happened in the situation where 42 is H, you are less likely to have
selected flip 42 in particular from the bucket if it was H than if it was T, so with Bayesian reasoning, the
probability is lower that 42 is H given you select 42 from the bucket than that 42 is T. This bias
undermines the assumption of the original paper in their paired t tests that the mean difference between
the conditional probabilities of a hit given X hits and of a hit given X misses should be 0 under the null
hypothesis, and as Miller and Sanjurjo point out, accounting for this bias makes the hot hand more
plausible than GVT claim.
However, it would seem like the runs and 𝜒
2
tests GVT did, because they do not involve
conditional probabilities, would not be as contaminated, if at all, by the bias pointed out by Miller and
Sanjurjo. Thus, perhaps some of GVT’s results are still valid, but perhaps a better interpretation of them
than to conclude that the hot hand isn’t real is to conclude that the hot hand is not something exhibited by
many players, as is suggested in an article by Pelechrinis and Winston.
Citations
1. “The hot hand in basketball: On the misperception of random sequences,” Thomas Gilovich,
Robert Vallone, and Amos Tversky,
https://labs.la.utexas.edu/gilden/files/2016/04/Gilo.Vallone.Tversky.pdf
2. Wikipedia, Wald-Wolfowitz Runs Test,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wald%E2%80%93Wolfowitz_runs_test
3. The Conversation, “The ‘hot hand’ is a real basketball phenomenon – but only some players have
the ability to go on these basket-making streaks”, Konstantinos Pelechrinis and Wayne Winston,
https://theconversation.com/the-hot-hand-is-a-real-basketball-phenomenon-but-only-some-player
s-have-the-ability-to-go-on-these-basket-making-streaks-179082
4. The Conversation, “Momentum isn’t magic – vindicating the hot hand with the mathematics of
streaks”, Joshua Miller and Adam Sanjurjo, Momentum isn't magic – vindicating the hot hand
with the mathematics of streaks (theconversation.com)
